## Abstract 
Mutation is a critical mechanism by which evolution explores the functional
landscape of proteins. Despite our ability to experimentally inflict
mutations at will, it remains difficult to link sequence-level perturbations
to systems-level responses. Here, we present a framework centered on
measuring changes in the free energy of the system to link individual
mutations in an allosteric transcriptional repressor to the parameters
which govern its response. We find that the energetic effects of the
mutations can be categorized into several classes which have characteristic
curves as a function of the inducer concentration. We experimentally test
these diagnostic predictions using the well-characterized LacI repressor of
*Escherichia coli*, probing several mutations in the DNA binding and inducer
binding domains. We find that the change in gene expression due to a point
mutation can be captured by modifying only the model parameters that describe
the respective domain of the wild-type protein. These parameters appear to
be insulated, with mutations in the DNA binding domain altering only the DNA
affinity and those in the inducer binding domain altering only the allosteric
parameters. Changing these subsets of parameters tunes the free energy of the
system in a way that is concordant with theoretical expectations. Finally, we
show that the induction profiles and resulting free energies associated with
pairwise double mutants can be predicted with quantitative accuracy given
knowledge of the single mutants, providing an avenue for identifying and
quantifying epistatic interactions.
