## Abstract
Rapid changes in extracellular osmolarity are one of many insults microbial
cells face on a daily basis. To protect against such shocks, *Escherichia
coli* and other microbes express several types of transmembrane channels that
open and close in response to changes in membrane tension. In *E. coli*, one
of the most abundant channels is the mechanosensitive channel of large
conductance (MscL). While this channel has been heavily characterized through
structural methods, electrophysiology, and theoretical modeling, our
understanding of its role in preventing cell death due to osmotic shock
remains tenuous. In this work, we examine the contribution of MscL alone to
cell survival after osmotic shock at single-cell resolution using
quantitative fluorescence microscopy. We conducted these experiments in an
*E. coli* strain which is lacking all mechanosensitive channel genes save for
MscL, whose expression was tuned across 3 orders of magnitude through
modifications of the Shine-Dalgarno sequence. While theoretical models
suggest that only a few MscL channels would be needed to alleviate even large
changes in osmotic pressure, we find that between 500 and 700 channels per
cell are needed to convey upwards of 80\% survival. This number agrees with
the average MscL copy number measured in wild-type *E. coli* cells through
proteomic studies and quantitative Western blotting. Furthermore, we observed
zero survival events in cells with fewer than $\approx$ 100 channels per
cell. This work opens new questions concerning the contribution of other
mechanosensitive channels to survival, as well as regulation of their
activity.
