## Results
### DNA Binding Domain Mutants

With this arsenal of analytic diagnostics, we can begin to explore the
mutational space of the repressor and map these mutations to the
biophysical parameters they control. As one of the most thoroughly
studied transcription factors, LacI has been subjected to numerous
crystallographic and mutational studies [@lewis1996; @daber2009a; @daber2011a; @swerdlow2014]. One such work generated a set
of point mutations in the LacI repressor and examined the diversity of
the phenotypic response to different allosteric effectors [@daber2011a]. However,
several experimental variables were unknown, precluding precise
calculation of $\Delta F$ as presented in the previous section. In
@daber2011a, the repressor variants and the fluorescence reporter were
expressed from separate plasmids. As the copy numbers of these plasmids
fluctuate in the population, both the population average repressor copy
number and the number of regulated promoters were unknown. Both of these
quantities have been shown previously to significantly alter the
measured gene expression and calculation of $\Delta F$ is dependent on
knowledge of their values. While the approach presented in 
@daber2011a considers the Lac repressor as an MWC molecule, the copy numbers of the
repressor and the reporter gene were swept into an effective parameter
${R \over K_{DNA}}$, hindering our ability to distinguish between
changes in repressor copy number or in DNA binding energy. To test our
hypothesis of free energy differences resulting from various parameter
perturbations, we used the dataset in @daber2011a as a guide and chose a
subset of the mutations to quantitatively dissect. To control copy
number variation, the mutant repressors and the reporter gene were
integrated into the *E. coli* chromosome where the copy numbers are
known and tightly controlled [@razo-mejia2018; @garcia2011]. Furthermore, the mutations were paired
with ribosomal binding sties where the level of translation of the
wild-type repressor had been directly measured previously [@garcia2011].

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We made three amino acid substitutions (Y17I, Q18A, and Q18M) that are
critical for the DNA-repressor interaction. These mutations were
introduced into the *lacI* sequence used in @garcia2011
with four different ribosomal binding site sequences that were shown
(via quantitative Western blotting) to tune the wild-type repressor copy
number across three orders of magnitude. These mutant constructs were
integrated into the *E. coli* chromosome harboring a Yellow Fluorescent
Protein (YFP) reporter. The YFP promoter included the native O2 LacI
operator sequence which the wild-type LacI repressor binds with high
specificity ($\Delta\varepsilon_{RA} = -13.9\, k_BT$). The fold-change
in gene expression for each mutant across twelve concentrations of IPTG
was measured via flow cytometry. As we mutated only a single amino acid
with the minimum number of base pair changes to the codons from the
wild-type sequence, we find it unlikely that the repressor copy number
was drastically altered from those reported in @garcia2011 for the wild-type
sequence paired with the same ribosomal binding site sequence. In
characterizing the effects of these DNA binding mutations, we take the
repressor copy number to be unchanged. Any error introduced by this
assumption should be manifest as a larger than predicted systematic
shift in the free energy change when the repressor copy number is
varied.

![**Induction profiles and free-energy differences of DNA binding domain
mutations.** Each column corresponds to the highlighted mutant at the top of
the figure. Each strain was paired with the native O2 operator sequence. Open
points correspond to the strain for each mutant from which the DNA binding
energy was estimated. (A) Induction profiles of each mutant at four different
repressor copy numbers as a function of the inducer concentration. Points
correspond to the mean fold change in gene expression of 6–10 biological
replicates. Error bars are the SEM. Shaded regions demarcate the 95\% credible
region of the induction profile generated by the estimated DNA binding
energy. (B) Data collapse of all points for each mutant shown in A using only
the DNA binding energy estimated from a single repressor copy number. Points
correspond to the average fold change in gene expression of 6–10 biological
replicates. Error bars are SEM. Where error bars are not visible, the
relative error in measurement is smaller than the size of the marker. (C) The
change in the free energy resulting from each mutation as a function of the
inducer concentration. Points correspond to the median of the marginal
posterior distribution for the free energy. Error bars represent the upper
and lower bounds of the 95\% credible region. Points in A at the detection
limits of the flow cytometer (near fold-change values of 0 and 1) were
neglected for calculation of the $\Delta F$. The IPTG concentration is shown on a
symmetric log scale with linear scaling ranging from 0 to $10^{-2}$ $\mu$M and log
scaling elsewhere. The shaded red lines in C correspond to the 95% credible
region of our predictions for $\Delta F$ based solely on estimation of
$\Delta\varepsilon_{RA}$ from the
strain with $R = 260$ repressors per cell.](ch3_fig3){#fig:DNA_muts
short-caption="Induction profiles and free-energy differences of DNA binding
domain mutations in the *lac* repressor."}

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A naïve hypothesis for the effect of a mutation in the DNA binding
domain is that *only* the DNA binding energy is affected. This
hypothesis appears to contradict the core principle of allostery in that
ligand binding in one domain influences binding in another, suggesting
that changing parameter modifies them all. The characteristic curves
summarized in @Fig:deltaF_theory give a
means to discriminate between these two hypotheses by examining the
change in the free energy. Using a single induction profile (white-faced
points in @Fig:DNA_muts), we estimated the DNA
binding energy using Bayesian inferential methods, the details of which
are thoroughly discussed in the Materials and Methods as well as in the
supplemental Chapter 7. The shaded red region for each mutant in
@Fig:DNA_muts represents the 95\% credible region of
this fit whereas all other shaded regions are 95% credible regions of
the predictions for other repressor copy numbers. We find that
redetermining only the DNA binding energy accurately captures the
majority of the induction profiles, indicating that other parameters are
unaffected. One exception is for the lowest repressor copy numbers
($R = 60$ and $R=124$ per cell) of mutant Q18A at low concentrations
of IPTG. However, we note that this disagreement is comparable to that
observed for the wild-type repressor binding to the weakest operator in
@razo-mejia2018, illustrating that our model is imperfect in
characterizing weakly repressing architectures. Including other
parameters in the fit (such as $\Delta\varepsilon_{AI}$) does not
significantly improve the accuracy of the predictions. Furthermore, the
magnitude of this disagreement also depends on the choice of the fitting
strain (see supplemental Chapter 7).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mutations Y17I and Q18A both weaken the affinity of the repressor to the
DNA relative to the wild type strain with binding energies of
$-9.9 ^{+0.1}_{-0.1}\, k_BT$ and $-11.0^{+0.1}_{-0.1}\, k_BT$,
respectively. Here we report the median of the inferred posterior
probability distribution with the superscripts and subscripts
corresponding to the upper and lower bounds of the 95% credible region.
These binding energies are comparable to that of the wild-type repressor
affinity to the native LacI operator sequence O3, with a DNA binding
energy of $-9.7\, k_BT$. The mutation Q18M increases the strength of
the DNA-repressor interaction relative to the wild-type repressor with a
binding energy of $-15.43^{+0.07}_{-0.06}\, k_BT$, comparable to the
affinity of the wild-type repressor to the native O1 operator sequence
($-15.3\, k_BT$). It is notable that a single amino acid substitution
of the repressor is capable of changing the strength of the DNA binding
interaction well beyond that of many single base-pair mutations in the
operator sequence [@barnes2019].

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Using the new DNA binding energies, we can collapse all measurements of
fold-change as a function of the free energy as shown in
@Fig:DNA_muts (B). This allows us to test the
diagnostic power of the decomposition of the free energy described in
@Fig:deltaF_theory. To compute the
$\Delta F$ for each mutation, we inferred the observed mean free
energy of the mutant strain for each inducer concentration and repressor
copy number (see Materials and Methods as well as the SI text for a
detailed explanation of the inference). We note that in the limit of
extremely low or high fold-change, the inference of the free energy is
either over- or under-estimated, respectively, introducing a systematic
error. Thus, points which are close to these limits are omitted in the
calculation of $\Delta F$. We direct the reader to the SI text for a
detailed discussion of this systematic error. With a measure of
$F^\mathrm{(mut)}$ for each mutant at each repressor copy number, we
compute the difference in free energy relative to the wild-type strain
with the same repressor copy number and operator sequence, restricting
all variability in $\Delta F$ solely to changes in
$\Delta\varepsilon_{RA}$.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The change in free energy for each mutant is
shown in @Fig:DNA_muts (C). It can be seen that the $\Delta F$ for each
mutant is constant as a function of the inducer concentration and is
concordant with the prediction generated from fitting
$\Delta\varepsilon_{RA}$ to a single repressor copy number [red lines
@Fig:DNA_muts (C)]. This is in line with the predictions outlined in
@Fig:deltaF_theory (C) and (D), indicating that the allosteric parameters are
"insulated", meaning they are not affected by the DNA binding domain
mutations. As the $\Delta F$ for all repressor copy numbers collapses onto
the prediction, we can say that the expression of the repressor itself is the
same or comparable with that of the wild type. If the repressor copy number
were perturbed in addition to $\Delta \varepsilon_{RA}$, one would expect a
shift away from the prediction that scales logarithmically with the change in
repressor copy number. However, as the $\Delta F$ is approximately the same
for each repressor copy number, it can be surmised that the mutation does not
significantly change the expression or folding efficiency of the repressor
itself. These results allow us to state that the DNA binding energy
$\Delta\varepsilon_{RA}$ is the only parameter modified by the DNA mutants
examined.
