### Predicting Effects of Pairwise Double Mutations

Given full knowledge of each individual mutation, we can draw
predictions of the behavior of the pairwise double mutants with no free
parameters based on the simplest null hypothesis of no epistasis. The
formalism of $\Delta F$ defined by Eq. eq:delF explicitly
states that the contribution to the free energy of the system from the
difference in DNA binding energy and the allosteric parameters are
strictly additive. Thus, deviations from the predicted change in free
energy would suggest epistatic interactions between the two mutations.

To test this additive model, we constructed nine double mutant strains, each
having a unique inducer binding (F161T, Q291V, Q291K) and DNA binding
mutation (Y17I, Q18A, Q18M). To make predictions with an appropriate
representation of the uncertainty, we computed a large array of induction
profiles given random draws from the posterior distribution for the DNA
binding energy (determined from the single DNA binding mutants) as well as
from the joint posterior for the allosteric parameters (determined from the
single inducer binding mutants). These predictions, shown in Fig.
@fig:dbl_muts (A) and (B) as shaded blue curves, capture all experimental
measurements of the fold-change [Fig. @fig:dbl_muts (A)] and the inferred
difference in free energy [Fig. @fig:dbl_muts (B)]. The latter indicates that
there are no epistatic interactions between the mutations queried in this
work, though if there were, systematic deviations from these predictions
would shed light on how the epistasis is manifest.

The precise agreement between the predictions and measurements for Q291K
paired with either Q18A or Q18M is striking as Q291K drastically changed
$\Delta\varepsilon_{AI}$ in addition to $K_A$ and $K_I$. Our ability to
predict the induction profile and free energy change underscores the extent
to which the DNA binding energy and the allosteric parameters are insulated
from one another. Despite this insulation, the repressor still functions as
an allosteric molecule, emphasizing that the mutations we have inserted do
not alter the pathway of communication between the two domains of the
protein. As the double mutant Y17I-Q291K exhibits fold-change of
approximately $1$ across all IPTG concentrations [Fig. @fig:dbl_muts (A)],
these mutations in tandem make repression so weak it is beyond the limits
which are detectable by our experiments. As a consequence, we are unable to
estimate $\Delta F$ nor experimentally verify the corresponding prediction
[grey box in Fig. @fig:dbl_muts (B)]. However, as the predicted fold-change
in gene expression is also approximately $1$ for all $c$, we believe that the
prediction shown for $\Delta F$ is likely accurate. One would be able to
infer the $\Delta F$ to confirm these predictions using a more sensitive
method for measuring the fold-change, such as single-cell microscopy or
colorimetric assays.

![**Induction and free-energy profiles of DNA binding and inducer binding
double mutants.** (A) Fold change in gene expression for each double mutant as
a function of IPTG. Points and errors correspond to the mean and SE of 6–10
biological replicates. Where not visible, error bars are smaller than the
corresponding marker. Shaded regions correspond to the 95% credible region of
the prediction given knowledge of the single mutants. These were generated by
drawing $10^4$ samples from the $\Delta\varepsilon_{RA}$ posterior distribution
of the single DNA binding domain mutants and the joint probability
distribution of $K_A$, $K_I$, and $\Delta\varepsilon_{AI}$ from the single
inducer binding domain mutants. (B) The difference in free energy of each double
mutant as a function of the reference free
energy. Points and errors correspond to the median and bounds of the 95%
credible region of the posterior distribution for the inferred $\Delta F$. Shaded
lines region are the predicted change in free energy, generated in the same
manner as the shaded lines in A. All measurements were taken from a strain
with 260 repressors per cell paired with a reporter with the native O2 LacI
operator sequence. In all plots, the IPTG concentration is shown on a
symmetric log axis with linear scaling between 0 and $10^{-2}\,\mu$M and log scaling
elsewhere.](ch3_fig5){#fig:dbl_muts short-caption="Induction and free-energy
profiles of DNA binding and inducer binding double mutants."}
